SPEAKER: I'd like to introduce
the student body to President
of the university, Mr. Shannon.
MR. SHANNON: Members
of the university,
I apologize for the
delay in arriving,
but I did want to give time for
the switch from University Hall
and also to complete some
aspects of my remarks.
I appreciate your waiting.
I come to you today to speak
calmly and dispassionately
about the events
of the past 10 days
nationally and at the
University of Virginia that have
profoundly shocked all of us.
I want to talk to you directly
about a number of the matters
which fill our mind and
personally share with you
the concern, the
responsibilities,
and the commitment that
I have to you as student
and the faculty, as members
of the university and to you
personally and individually,
as a corporate body
and as individuals,
in other words.
This is a time of the utmost
gravity in the university
and the country.
I don't have to tell you that.
We all know it.
And I hope we can find the
best in every one of us
to meet this occasion.
I ask you to listen to me and to
continue to help me in the days
ahead as you have helped
me during the past week
to preserve the university
as a place of learning
and a free expression of ideas.
I want you to help
me to preserve
the bonds of human
trust so that we
as people and as human beings
hoping to fulfill our highest
ideals and human capabilities
can work rationally together
and constructively
together to attain
the goals of the university
and national goals.
I ask you to listen, and I've
been listening constantly
to you.
From the very beginning of
the difficulties last Monday
night, students have been in
free and almost continuous
contact.
Your advice and your
counsel and my ability
to work freely and
with absolute trust
in you and in what you are
trying to communicate to me
has kept us still intact
as a university this day.
Faculty have participated
in the same way.
And the complete desire from
a wide spectrum of opinion
to assist me in upholding
the university, whatever
differences of view prevail,
to preserve within a university
free expression and
responsible action
has sustained me in a
week of sleeplessness
and of hours of
decisions, each of which
could irrevocably affected
the careers, the plans,
the livelihoods, and even the
life and limb of each one us.
Now the very process
of listening to you,
as I think you can
understand, means
that I shall do my
best this afternoon
to cover the things that
are upper most for us.
But the time has
not made it possible
for me to cover
fully in the past,
and it has made it difficult
and almost impossible
for me to cover it today.
And for that reason
there certainly will
be fragmentary
aspects of my remarks.
I hope also that you can
understand the responsibilities
that I bear as president.
I am responsible to see
that the university is not
used by those who seek to--
seek to warp it to an
instrument of their own ends.
I have a responsibility to
all faculty and students
to see that even in the most
unusual circumstances a time
of terrible national division
that the ability of everyone
is maintained to express
views, that those views can
be protected to be heard, that
they will not be interfered
with or harassed, and at the
same time as a State University
I have obligations
to the community
and for order and
for personal safety.
I've asked you to meet
with me this afternoon
at a moment of such
crisis for the country
and for the university
that we love.
It would be less
than honest if I
didn't emphasis this, the
gravity of the position
that we face.
But if it is outraged
love and reverence that
make us all so angry and
divided in many ways,
let us remember that love and
reverence can also be the bond
and must be the bond that
bring us together if we are
determined to set things right.
I am confident that both the
country and the university
can take a lot of punishment
and still survive.
Given the present
condition, this
is a good thing and
a fortunate thing.
But I believe that the
future of our country
and of our university
deserves the best
thought and the hardest work,
which each of us is capable of.
And you may be sure that
I am determined to give
every ounce of my energy.
As we meet this afternoon
so far as I'm aware,
the University of Virginia
is the only major university
on the east coast that is
really open with classes and--
[APPLAUSE]
--with classes and
scholarly work in progress.
At the same time, there
is the free opportunity
for those who feel that there
are other matters are more
important to which
by the assessment
of their own responsibilities
and their own duties
to refrain from
attending classes
have been free to do so.
[APPLAUSE]
I believe it is the desire
of the overwhelming majority
of the students and the faculty
that the university continues
to proceed, that it remain open.
[CHANTS]
This is a tribute.
This is a tribute just
as you've interpreted it
to the fact that we
are still sitting here
and that you can interpret
a boycott and a strike.
Again, your strike
has not been one
to interfere or to
coerce other people.
I've been struck and
impressed with this.
[APPLAUSE]
And in another sense, the fact
that we still are operating
is a tribute to the leadership
of many individual students
and of the student
body as a whole--
as a whole.
An intend that we
should proceed this way
that the open opportunity--
and I'll talk more about this
later-- will continue to exist.
And I shall count upon
your help, as I say,
as we go forward.
Your spirit, the spirit of the
students over the last two days
has been magnificent.
I really have been never
more proud of the students
and the faculty of the
university than I am today.
And the way that
you have come to me,
the way that you have made
known to me your views in a way
that I can have that feeling
that we are working and working
together with
sometimes divided views
but always trying to
communicate and that there
is no division in
that sense among us.
Now never-- also some
mistakes have been made.
I do not exempt
myself from them.
I share in these mistakes,
and I have no doubt
that as we try to work our
way through that some more may
be made.
We are human, and the
university-- and I'm
a human being.
And the university
is not organized
as the kind of organization
or human society that
can act in the most wise
way under the conditions
and make the wisest decisions
under the conditions
under which they have
constantly had to have been
made in the last five days.
Despite all this, I hope
we can be of good cheer.
The times are grave.
But I see no evil now existing
that cannot be corrected
in this university or in the
country if we work on it,
if we work on it with the best
energy and with the wisest
means that we can devise.
John P wrote in one of the
morning newspapers that
was brought
attention has defined
a good university as one
that has at its objective
the development of
the free mind in what
might be called the atmosphere
of competing truths.
This is an atmosphere in which
a man can think otherwise,
and there are many
instances in which
men can think otherwise
and have shown it here
without interference
or coercion.
Let us maintain it.
Now Robert White is also
the despairing president
of Kent State.
I want to pay tribute again
to them at that institution.
I hear lunacy.
He says on one side I see
frightening repression.
On the other side,
I don't hear anyone
in the center saying let
us examine, let us discuss,
let us rationally investigate.
Now I don't think
that's true here,
and I think that is
why we're here today
and we'll keep it that way.
Now my comments--
[APPLAUSE]
Now I want to make
comments about the events
of the university
during the past few days
and where we go from here,
how we move to change
things for the better.
After that, I want to make some
suggestions about two things
that I believe we can do
immediately in a practical way
to advance the cause
of peace in Vietnam
and to bring about a change
in the national scene
beyond the university.
[APPLAUSE]
Now one word about the
work of the marshal.
It had come to--
it had been absolutely
outstanding,
and I was disappointed to
have called to my attention
today in the Daily Progress
a reference to marshals
being exempt from arrest.
I'm calling on all of you before
I proceed to other remarks
so that we will not have
occasions where students will
be in danger of arrest,
and I will do everything
in my power to prevent that.
I would remind you that the
marshals have volunteered
and represent every shade of
opinion on all of the issues
and thinking that is before us--
many of them strong sympathizers
in the strike movement.
That's a perfect example.
We have both
opportunities exemplified.
Now in the fast moving
events of the last six days,
constant discussions,
constant meetings,
constant communication,
it's very difficult--
constant rumors--
It's very difficult to
be sure and accurate
of all that has gone on.
It's difficult to
give in summary
and capsule a precise account.
I want to try to do as much as
I can in that regard beginning
with Monday night where it
began with the first knowledge
that I had--
that a number of
students had met together
in a deep concern, a deep agony
over the news of the deaths
of students at Kent State and
wished to come to my house
and wished to
express that feeling
and wish my assurance that
feelings and expression
and the university
properly conducted
would not be interfered with.
I gladly told them
that I would see them.
They came.
We had comments.
I know some of them
in which I tried
to express my sympathy,
my concern, and certainly
the fact that no
harassment is ever
a part of the philosophy in the
background of this university.
Despite this, a building
was illegally broken into
and occupied.
And as president--
and as president
of the university charged
with the protection of people
and his property, I sought
to relieve that situation
by a court injunction as
the most non-violent means
of assuring protection.
It has been-- it has been
my effort to act with the--
in this way with the least
requirement of any outside help
to have operate within
the university for us
to operate as a university
and to discipline ourselves
and not to require
other authority.
Now no police
action or any other
was requested or was sought
or was use that night.
The building was cleared
in a very rapid manner
after the reading
of the injunction.
An attempted firebombing of a
neighboring building failed.
And as I say again,
this illegal action
did come from a spontaneous
demonstration of sympathy
for the violence and concern for
and the deaths at Kent State.
Now on Tuesday-- on Tuesday,
peaceful demonstrations
against the war and in
sympathy with Kent State
were held and continued
largely throughout the day.
The injunction
contrary to some rumors
is not one that prohibits
peaceful assembly in any way.
Now on Wednesday, again, that
Tuesday morning immediately
after before I left
the university at all
to try to continue
with the normal day
before I left on Monday night,
I proposed and discussed
with Mr. [INAUDIBLE],, the
president of the student
council.
And he agreed immediately
for a memorial service
immediately to express our
common feeling over the events
at Kent State, the reason
why they had arisen,
and to be available to the
student body of the university.
Also on Wednesday
and also on Tuesday
evening, I understood there
would be demand formulated
affecting both the university
and the national scene
that the student council
would wait to present to me
and to do so publicly.
I made myself available
to do this in order again
not only to be in
constant communication
with individual students,
many of those who simply were
individuals, many of those
who has other student
responsibility.
On Wednesday also we had
events during the day.
Again, I came to
the students, made
myself available to express
positive action that I
had undertaken to
do on our behalf
and on your behalf of students.
And on that evening
in accordance with
the university's long tradition
of the protection of freedom
of speech through-- and you
have no idea of the vilification
and the abuse that I have been
subjected to because I have
protected that right--
two of the most controversial
speakers of the day
addressed a large audience
in University Hall.
Following this late that evening
between 1,500 and 2,000 people
assembled in the
dark outside my house
where I had retired with
my wife and five daughters.
The mob was addressed
by persons, including
those visiting speakers.
They shouted and were
agitated in many ways.
This was an absolutely dangerous
and frightening situation.
I refrained from any request
with previous knowledge
for any kind of
police protection
or any protection of any kind.
I refrained after
this mob was assembled
from requesting or communicating
with anyone outside of one
or two student leaders.
I also as a result of this with
the assistance of the student
marshals, the mob dispersed and
left the house and much of it
proceeded to Maury Hall, the
university building previously
occupied.
Where the building was
occupied again damage was done,
fires were set in two buildings.
Awareness of the injunction and
the action of student marshals,
again, resulted in
non-violent departure
of these persons who had
illegally entered it,
and a number of those
who did so appear
not to have been students but
persons from away and outside.
During the night, the danger
of violence at the University
reached a near peak.
As you know, a crowd
assembled at the intersections
of 29 and 250, a mob of
several hundred people
chanting and
apparently threatening
the safety of
motorist and people.
If violence had
occurred there, there
would have been
an absolute riot.
Now as the movement came
back farther up 29--
now I want you to
listen to this.
I'm trying to--
I'm trying to give
you some explanations
that I think are useful
and necessary to all of us.
By following the recommendations
again of the students,
we were in a
confrontation situation
with a large number
of police drawn up
and with many students
drawn up on the other side.
And following the
recommendations
of the students
and their marshals
and the president of
the student council
and with my specific request,
Vice President Williams
advised the students that
the police would withdraw.
The police withdrew on the
understanding and assumption
that the spectators would
disperse and they did.
The police-- the police
marched away immediately,
and the spectators
dispersed, as I say,
and the violence was
here again averted.
Well, this is what
we're working on.
Now the intensity of
that threat brought
about the strong recommendation
of the police and the state
police that if such
mobs again formed
and the laws against impeding
traffic and disorderly conduct
were again broken
that action would
have to be taken, that the
arrest would have to be made,
that there would
be no alternative.
Now Friday afternoon
city, county,
and authorities
and representatives
of the state police
requested meetings
with the officials
of the university
and required that control of all
police and maintenance of order
be transferred to the police
authorities at 6 o'clock.
I refused.
[APPLAUSE]
But during the night,
Friday night crowds again
formed at a major
city intersection
on the edge of the
central grounds,
again, harassed passing
motorists and pedestrians.
Again, I had assured the
state police and the city
that I would be in contact,
that I would undertake
to be in a position where
there would be representatives
of the university available
so that we would have liaison
and again that we would have
the possibility of averting
direct conflict.
The crowd was
again moving, and I
won't to go into all
the details there.
But the matter came--
the matter came to the point
where I was not at the scene,
was not able to be at the scene.
Someone at the scene in order
to preserve authority and order
had to have the authority to act
on the judgment of maintaining
the law and in maintaining
the order as far as assembly
was concerned.
As long as I could--
as long as I could,
we kept in touch,
but I was not able to do so.
And my responsibility as far as
a public official is concerned,
I had to transfer that
responsibility to the police
captain on the scene.
Now the law violations were
not so extreme that night
as had been, I understand,
the night before.
The police and university
officials on the scene,
however, came to the point in
the light of a whole series
of five days of disturbances
despite my abhorrence
of the use of police in
academic institutions
on a [INAUDIBLE] night
of the difficulties,
I believe that action
had to be taken
in the interest
of the university.
And I consequently transferred
that responsibility
and gave that
responsibility to carry out
whatever action was necessary.